JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Gwen is away this week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
North Carolina sues the federal
government
to protect a controversial
bathroom law. The
U.S. attorney general vows the
Department
of Justice stands with the
transgender community.
We talk with North Carolina's
governor, Pat
McCrory.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And it's
Politics Monday.
The general election has all but
started,
yet both parties brace for
contentious conventions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Monday, 20
years after a brutal and bloody
civil war,
how Bosnia is reconciling with
its Muslim
population.
MILORAD DODIK, President, Serb
Republic (through
translator): What we can do is
to ensure that
we don't behave in an inhumane
way. Regardless
of our religion, nationality and
ideology,
we shouldn't harm each other.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: North Carolina
refused today
to stop enforcing a law that
bars new protections
for gays, lesbians, bisexuals
and transgender
people.
Republican Governor Pat McCrory
announced
he won't comply with a Justice
Department
demand. Instead, McCrory
announced he's suing
the Justice Department, and he
accused the
Obama administration of
overreaching.
GOV. PAT MCCRORY (R), North
Carolina: I do
not agree with their
interpretation of federal
law. We believe a court, rather
than a federal
agency, should tell our state,
our nation
and employers across the country
what the
law requires.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Washington,
Attorney
General Loretta Lynch announced
Justice is
filing its own civil rights suit
against the
state. She said restricting
bathroom access
for transgender people is
state-sponsored
discrimination.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: None
of us can stand by when a state
enters the
business of legislating identity
and insist
that a person pretend to be
something or someone
that they are not or invents a
problem that
doesn't exist as a pretext for
discrimination
and harassment.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will have
an interview
with Governor McCrory right
after the news
summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Cooler
temperatures and light rain
brought some relief
to the fire zone around Fort
McMurray, Canada.
That gave officials a chance to
get back into
the devastated city and see the
damage firsthand.
More than 80,000 people have
been evacuated
and it's unclear when they will
be able to
go home.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A
tough-talking mayor has
been elected president of the
Philippines
in today's election. Rodrigo
Duterte has vowed
to wipe out corruption and kill
criminals.
He's also raised eyebrows with
sex jokes and
foul language. Still, millions
of Filipinos
supported him in a bid for
radical change
after years of grinding poverty,
poor services
and insurgent violence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Brazil, the
impeachment
of President Dilma Rousseff was
put on hold
today, at least temporarily. The
head of the
Lower House of Congress annulled
April's vote
on impeachment charges two days
before the
Senate was to vote on suspending
Rousseff.
She reacted cautiously to the
news.
DILMA ROUSSEFF, Brazilian
President (through
translator): I have just
learned, the same
way you have, that an injunction
has been
accepted and that, therefore,
the process
has been suspended. But I don't
have this
information officially. I am
speaking here
because I could not in any way
pretend I wasn't
aware of the same thing you are.
But it is
not official. I do not know the
consequences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The issue may now
return to
the Lower House of Brazil's
Congress, delaying
the impeachment process by days
or weeks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: North Korea's
supreme leader
got a new title today, party
chairman. The
move came as the ruling Workers'
Party wrapped
up its first congress in 36
years. State television
showed the elaborate meeting,
where Kim Jong-un
pledged to further strengthen
North Korea's
nuclear weapons capability in
quality and
quantity.
Also today, three BBC
journalists were expelled
from North Korea over their
reporting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, this
was swearing-in day for
Ferguson, Missouri's
first black police chief.
Delrish Moss takes
over a mostly white force in a
city that's
two-thirds black. The killing of
Michael Brown
in 2014 led to federal findings
of widespread
racial bias and profiling by
Ferguson police.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's word
that poisonings
from electronic cigarettes are
surging among
young children. Nationwide
Children's Hospital
in Columbus, Ohio says
preschoolers can put
e-cigarettes in their mouths and
drink liquid
nicotine. It causes vomiting and
other symptoms.
Cases surged from 14 a month in
January of
2012 to 223 a month by last
spring.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street's
week got off
to a lackluster start. The Dow
Jones industrial
average lost 34 points to close
below 17706.
The Nasdaq rose 14 and the S&P
500 added a
point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the planet
Mercury made
a rare transit across the face
of the sun
today. NASA animation depicted
the tiny planet
crossing between Earth and sun
over seven-and-a-half-hours.
The actual event, viewed by a
satellite, showed
Mercury as a black dot against
the glowing
solar surface. Mercury's transit
happens only
about 13 times every 100 years.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
we talk with
North Carolina's governor about
the federal
fight to protect the state's
bathroom law;
Donald Trump's battle to unite
the Republican
Party; Saudi Arabia ousts the
most powerful
man in oil; and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was an openly
contentious
day, as the fight intensified
over a controversial
state law in North Carolina,
restricting bathroom
use to one's gender at birth.
Both the state's governor and
legislature
sued the federal government,
rejecting the
Justice Department's view that
the law violates
civil rights.
As we heard a few moments ago,
U.S. Attorney
General Loretta Lynch vowed to
stand by the
transgender community.
We are joined now by North
Carolina's Republican
governor, Pat McCrory.
Governor McCrory, welcome.
You know...
GOV. PAT MCCRORY (R), North
Carolina: Thank
you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you for
being with us.
You know what the attorney
general said today.
She said the Justice Department
is going to
take action to block
implementation of this
law. So, will you comply with
that move by
Justice? Or will you go ahead
and try to continue
to implement?
GOV. PAT MCCRORY: No, we're
actually taking
them to court also.
And this is what we are seeking,
is clarity
in the judicial system to
further define gender
identity and gender identity's
usage in our
restrooms in our high schools,
our junior
highs, our elementary schools,
our universities
and our highway rest stops.
We just -- we are seeking basic
clarity of
this, because the executive
branch doesn't
have the power to interpret law.
That's the
power of the judicial branch.
And that's what
we're seeking.
But what the attorney general
has done now
with her new ruling is basically
all employers
in the United States of America
and all universities
in the United States of America,
based upon
her letter of interpretation, is
saying that
all employers must allow gender
identity in
the private sector for any
employer over 15
employees.
That means a man who believes
they're a woman
would be able to go into a
woman's restroom,
locker room or shower facility.
And that's
where the dispute is, and we're
asking for
basic clarity of that. It is a
very complex
and emotional issue. And I think
the courts
are the right way to do it. And
then, sooner
or later, I think the U.S.
Congress has got
to get clarity on this whole
issue also.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Governor,
we will see
how it plays out legally.
But I'm sure you heard the
attorney general
say today -- she said this
amounts to state-sponsored
discrimination. She compared it
to the Jim
Crow laws of decades ago,
wherein African-American,
black Americans were not allowed
to use restrooms
that white people were. She said
this is harming
innocent people.
GOV. PAT MCCRORY: That's
extremely divisive
rhetoric and dangerous rhetoric,
which is
totally be related to an issue
on whether
a male or female should use a
male bathroom
or a female restroom.
In fact, my chief of staff,
whose father was
a civil rights pioneer in
Durham, where the
attorney general also grew up,
we were watching
that together. And he went,
don't -- don't
go there. There is absolutely no
connection.
This is an issue which is really
about privacy
vs. equality and that balance.
And people
have an expectation of privacy,
according
to many of our citizens, not
just in North
Carolina, but, again, this is
now going to
be a nationwide issue. When you
go to a restroom
or to a locker room or to a
shower facility,
there is an expectation of
privacy, that the
only other people in that room,
in a very
private moment, I might add,
will be people
of the same gender.
And we have got to resolve this
very complex
and new issue that was actually
brought up
by the left, political left, not
the political
right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Governor --
Governor,
as I'm sure you also know, what
the transgender
community would argue is that
their privacy
is at stake as well.
And we heard the attorney
general say, she
said -- and I guess this is the
language in
the lawsuit -- they say this is
causing transgender
people to suffer emotional harm,
mental anguish,
distress, humiliation,
indignity.
Do you acknowledge that there is
that effect
from this law?
GOV. PAT MCCRORY: I acknowledge
we need to
work this out. And what we do in
North Carolina
and what many states are doing
right now -- I
think over 27 other states have
almost identical
laws as North Carolina, so this
is not just
a North Carolina issue -- is, we
-- I actually
encourage other types of
arrangements for
people of transgender.
It might be a unisex restroom or
shower facility
that is not in a multipurpose
area, to respect
both the unique needs of a
transgender or
to meet the unique needs of
girls and boys
and men and women and their
families, which
are the norms that we have been
using in America
for generations. It is a very
complex issue.
I'm extremely sensitive to
people's gender
identity, which is a brand-new
term in the
last several years. But they are
now interpreting,
not only gender identity.
There's a new term,
gender expression, which has not
been clearly
defined. And we need to get that
definition.
And I don't think it's the
executive branch's
role to define that.
I think that belongs either in
the courts.
Or, frankly, I think the U.S.
Congress needs
to quit ignoring this issue.
And, by the way,
I'm talking to my Republicans. I
think they
need to get clarity on this
issue for all
of the nation and all employers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor McCrory,
do you know
anyone who is transgender, and,
if so, what
have they said to you about
this?
GOV. PAT MCCRORY: You know,
different reactions.
Some of the transgender
community that I have
talked to is frankly upset that
the political
left brought this up, because
they didn't
think there was much of a
problem.
I didn't know -- we weren't
having a problem
in North Carolina until the city
of Charlotte,
before that, the city of
Houston, brought
up a mandate for all private
sector employers.
And I might add, just six months
ago, the
city of Houston rejected by a 61
percent of
the vote of the people a similar
mandate.
And no one, including the
attorney general,
attacked the city of Houston.
But, for some
reason, they're now attacking
the state where
she grew up in. And, again, this
is not just
a North Carolina issue. This
needs clarity
by the courts and by the U.S.
Congress.
I don't think we should have
different anti-discrimination
laws relating to this across the
nation. I
think this is a federal issue,
as most discrimination
laws are. And I think we need
consistency.
And this is where the courts
need to step
in. And I am very, very
sensitive to all sides
of this issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly,
Governor, we
have just a few seconds left. We
know that
a number of businesses have
expressed their
unhappiness about this, said
that they're
either not going to move to the
state or they're
not going to bring events to the
state. How
big a hit are you prepared to
take to see
North Carolina take financially?
GOV. PAT MCCRORY: Well, that's
why I am taking
it to the courts.
We are had one business, PayPal,
which, by
the way, does business in Sudan,
and Iran
and Saudi Arabia, where the gay
and lesbian
community is not welcomed at
all. In fact,
they are killed. So there is a
little selective
hypocrisy by one or two
companies.
But we want to work with the
private sector.
And, again, this is not just a
North Carolina
issue. This is going to be an
issue for the
entire United States, and I
think the federal
government does need to step in
through the
courts or through the U.S.
Congress and give
us all clarity in not only state
government,
but local governments throughout
the United
States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: North Carolina
Governor Pat
McCrory, we thank you.
GOV. PAT MCCRORY: Thank you very
much, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the race
for the White
House and one major divide
between Donald
Trump and Hillary Clinton: how
they will approach
women voters.
John Yang reports.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
How are you?
MAN: I'm doing well. How are
you?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Good.
JOHN YANG: For Hillary Clinton,
this is what
a pivot to the general election
looks like.
Looking beyond tomorrow's West
Virginia primary,
the Democratic front-runner was
talking family
issues in Virginia.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I would
like to see
us look at universal pre-K in
the school system.
Then we need to take a hard look
at how we
have a child care system that
does provide
quality child care at an
affordable cost.
JOHN YANG: It's not just that
rival Bernie
Sanders is favored in West
Virginia.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Don't let anybody tell you this
campaign is
over.
JOHN YANG: It's that this
bedroom community
outside Washington, D.C., is
likely to be
a key battleground in November.
One challenge
for the candidate who wants to
be the first
woman president? Winning the
votes of suburban
women, like Amy Fitzgerald of
Chantilly, Virginia.
She voted for Clinton in the
primary, but
says the former secretary of
state doesn't
understand the challenges of her
life.
AMY FITZGERALD, Virginia: It's
like she's
a puppet. Like I said, it's like
somebody
is handing her a piece of paper
and says,
OK, this is what America wants
to hear. This
is what you need to say. And
it's not really,
truly coming from her heart.
JOHN YANG: Mary McLean twice
voted for Barack
Obama and then for Donald Trump
in Virginia's
primary. Now she says she hoping
for a third
candidate.
MARY MCLEAN, Virginia: When it
comes to Hillary
Clinton, I think -- I get the
impression,
as much as she champion's
women's rights and
the rights -- the importance of
family, say
was, I would say, in the pockets
of big banks
when it came to the bailout.
JOHN YANG: Clinton's focus today
on suburban
women in this swing county in a
swing state
is part of her general election
strategy,
trying to win over independents
and Republicans
uncomfortable with Donald Trump.
Over the weekend, Trump
criticize Clinton
over her husband's infidelities.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
And Hillary was an enabler, and
she treated
women horribly. Just remember
this. And some
of those women were destroyed,
not by him,
but by the way that Hillary
Clinton treated
them after everything went down.
JOHN YANG: The all-but-certain
Republican
nominee has also been waging
verbal warfare
with party leaders.
Today, House Speaker Paul Ryan
seemed to try
to ease tensions with Trump,
telling The Milwaukee
Journal Sentinel that he would
step down as
co-chairman of this July's
Republican Convention
if that's what Trump wants.
"He's the nominee.
I will do whatever he wants with
respect to
the convention."
Trump is also looking ahead,
today naming
former rival-turned-supporter
Chris Christie
to head the transition team for
a potential
administration.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang in Stone
Ridge, Virginia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That brings us to
Politics
Monday with Amy Walter of The
Cook Political
Report and Tamara Keith of NPR.
So, let's talk about Hillary
Clinton out on
the campaign trail today,
clearly trying to
appeal, Tamara, to women voters
to make the
case that she's the one. And
yet, as you just
heard in that John Yang report,
it is a mixed
picture. How mixed is it?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: It is
more mixed for Donald Trump than
it is for
Hillary Clinton. Let's just be
clear. And
generally speaking, there is a
gender gap.
Going back to 1980, there is a
gender gap,
where women voters tend to favor
the Democrats.
For the last -- all those years,
they have
favored the Democrat. And so she
has demographics
on her side, certainly. But she
is working
hard. And, as John Yang pointed
out, she was
there in this very swing county
where the
-- where the congresswoman, the
new congresswoman
who represents that district,
has said she's
not ready yet to support Donald
Trump. She's
a Republican.
JUDY WOODRUFF: New Republican.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's right.
Amy.
AMY WALTER: Yes, I would say
Hillary Clinton
has a problem with women. Donald
Trump's problems
are bigger.
And when you look at the last
polling that
has come out nationally, among
suburban women
-- and, obviously, where we saw
the report
from John today, that's the key
area, swing
area -- she was at minus-10 in
terms of her
approval ratings among suburban
women. However,
Donald Trump was at minus-46.
But, as you saw from these women
-- I have
sat down -- I'm sure you have
too on the campaign
trail. I have sat in focus
groups with women
in other suburbs. And what they
are saying
is, they don't really love
Donald Trump or
what he -- his tone, his
temperament. They
like some of his positions on
the issues.
And, more importantly, they are
not in love
with Hillary Clinton. They are
-- she's still
going to have to work to get
them there. The
women who said they were voting
for her were
doing it much more as a vote
against Donald
Trump than for her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is there room
for Donald
Trump to gain with women,
Tamara? How do you
read that?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, he certainly
has room.
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH: There is lots of
running space
there.
It's not clear whether or not he
can actually
make up that ground. And how
does he do it?
Well, probably by changing the
way he's talking
right now, because, every time
he goes out,
he says another thing or repeats
something.
This woman's card, for instance,
that was
-- I don't know how many people
came on my
Twitter feed and said, I support
Bernie Sanders,
but, wow, this woman card thing
makes me want
to support Hillary Clinton,
things like that.
So, Donald Trump has a challenge
on his hands,
certainly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about --
Amy, what about
Hillary Clinton? I mean, where
does she -- how
does she get women more
enthusiastic about
her?
AMY WALTER: She has to do two
things.
One, she has to convince voters
that it is
more than just a bad thing to
vote for Donald
Trump; it's a big risk. And I
think you're
going to be hearing that over
and over again.
We heard -- the dangerous Donald
was part
of the rhetoric.
And it's going to be on issues,
not just about
women's issues, but security. Do
you feel
safe with him as the commander
in chief? So,
many of those sorts of
undertones, you are
going to hear in advertising, I
think, both
from Hillary Clinton and others.
And, at the end of the day,
though, if 2008
was hope and change,
unfortunately, I think
2016 is going to be fear and
loathing. And
it is going to be much more
about who do you
dislike less than who you like
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brace ourselves
for it.
TAMARA KEITH: It could be a very
grim six
months.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
a little bit
more about Donald Trump.
Clearly, Tamara, we're
witnessing some kind
of split, not just split,
mega-divisions inside
the Republican Party, as one
Republican after
another figures out what he or
she is going
to do. How serious is this split
in the party
right now?
TAMARA KEITH: It is very
serious. And it is
very public.
And the mere fact that there is
a nominee,
essentially -- there's nothing
standing between
Donald Trump, the nomination --
and his party
is not falling in line is a
significant sign,
that there are various members
of Congress,
the speaker of the House saying
he's not ready
yet.
And I think that the
establishment Republicans
don't know what to do. They
still don't know
what to do with Donald Trump.
You know, the
whole never Trump movement was
about, well,
he is not conservative enough.
He's not a
real Republican.
Well, voters didn't care.
Republican voters
didn't care. And so I think that
the Republican
establishment is now in this
place of just
not knowing what to do, how to
proceed, how
to keep their party, the party
that they think
it is or should be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
this?
AMY WALTER: And I think there's
a big -- I
think there is a big divide
between how Republicans
in Washington see this and how
Republican
voters are seeing this.
That is what I am watching. I'm
less concerned
about what Paul Ryan and other
elites are
doing. I'm much more concerned
about how Republican
voters feel. And right now, it
is true they
are divided, only 72 percent of
Republicans
right now saying that they would
vote for
Donald Trump up against Hillary
Clinton. That
is very low.
Normally, you want to hit 90
percent. If that
number starts moving closer to
90 percent,
then whether Paul Ryan is with
him or not
is not as significant. If it
doesn't move,
then that shows that Paul Ryan
reflects a
lot of the views of the
Republican Party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you do hear,
just quickly
to both of you, the argument
from the Trump
camp that, yes, we may not have
all Republicans
on board, but we are broadening
the picture
of voters who we can appeal to.
TAMARA KEITH: That is exactly
what they are
saying.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: And it's not showing
up at all.
Right now, his numbers with all
these groups
that you are talking about,
women, Democrats,
Latinos, younger voters,
independents, she
is doing better among them than
Obama did
against Mitt Romney.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is it -- so,
is this just
what they say while they figure
out what they're
going to do?
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
Unless you say it's over,
looking at the demographics,
the Clinton campaign is very
concerned about
Donald Trump. They are concerned
that this
is -- that people think this is
going to be
easy for her. And it's not.
As Chris Christie said, Donald
Trump threw
out the playbook. And I think
every one is
trying to figure out how to
react.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we have a
little bit
of time left...
AMY WALTER: We have a lot of
time...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... between now
and November
to see what's going on.
Tamara Keith, Amy Walter, great
to you have
both. Thank you.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
TAMARA KEITH: Glad to be here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
reconciling the
Muslim population in the Balkans
after a brutal
civil war; an investigation
sheds light on
rampant sexual abuse in private
schools; and
how America is struggling to
recycle its electronic
waste.
But first: Saudi Arabia's bold
plan to diversify
its economy by moving away from
oil, while
facing a rise in Iran's
influence in the region.
We examine the kingdom's
challenges with Simon
Henderson, director of the Gulf
and Energy
Policy Program at the Washington
Institute,
and Sarah Ladislaw, a senior
fellow at the
Center for Strategic and
International Studies,
where she is director of its
energy and national
security program.
Sarah, let me start with you.
Oil prices have gone up in the
last few days,
maybe because of the fires in
Canada. But
how big of an impact is the
change in specifically
oil or energy leadership in
Saudi Arabia?
SARAH LADISLAW, Center for
Strategic and International
Studies: Well, it's pretty
significant, especially
if you take the long view of
leadership on
energy policy within Saudi
Arabia.
I think both of the response
that they had
the response that they had to
the oil -- the
sort of overcapacity in oil
supply in the
oil market in 2014, which have
led to the
period we are now, where you
have sort of
lower oil prices, was really the
turning point
for the way people viewed the
role that Saudi
Arabia was going to play in the
markets.
I think what happened over the
weekend was
a much-anticipated leadership
shift that falls
in line with that broader
message of, you
know, we're going to play a new
and different
role in the oil market. We have
a new sort
of economic diversification
strategy. And
now we're going to have both the
institutional
structure and sort of the
leadership to lead
that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Simon
Henderson, how much
of this has to do with a power
grab or power
struggle or shuffle inside Saudi
Arabia, the
deputy crown prince, Mohammed
Bin Salman,
putting his fingerprint on
things?
SIMON HENDERSON, Washington
Institute For
Near East Policy: Well, he's
certainly putting
his fingerprint on things.
This is a young man, 30 years
old. And he
has risen from nowhere, or
mostly nowhere.
But he is the son of the king,
King Salman,
and so when King Salman came to
the throne
last year, since then, this
young man has
had a meteoric rise.
And he appears to have a vision,
an economic
vision. He's announced a grand
plan for vision
2030, which is a much less of a
role for oil.
And I suspect also he's got a
vision for himself,
that he wants to be the next
king of Saudi
Arabia.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sarah, what
about that Vision
2030 project, the idea we equate
or we connect
Saudi Arabia with oil in our
heads, the idea
that they could be less
fossil-fuel-dependent
in 15 years?
SARAH LADISLAW: Well, I think it
follows along
the lines of what you have seen
coming out
of Saudi Arabian energy
ministers and political
leadership for awhile, which is
this recognition
that the energy landscape is
changing, right?
They understand that climate
change is an
issue that a lot of different
countries take
seriously. They have talked
about it quite
openly. They are involved in
most of the major
multilateral initiatives to deal
with climate
change.
And I think if we weren't
talking about their
broad reform effort, we would be
talking about
their need to undertake economic
reform at
some point, given the outlook
for oil markets,
given the role -- the outsized
role that it
plays in their own economy. And
so, in many
ways, this new vision is
actually an extension
and a much bolder extension of
domestic economic
reform that people have thought
needed to
happen in the kingdom for a long
time.
I think the thing that people
are surprised
about is that it's happening at
a much faster
pace than people are used to
seeing coming
from the Saudi kingdom.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Put this in
perspective
to the struggle that is
happening between
Saudi Arabia and Iran right now.
SIMON HENDERSON: It's such a
struggle. And
it dominates so much thinking,
certainly in
Riyadh.
The house of Saud, the Saudi
family, are immensely
suspicious of Iran and, frankly,
on religious
terms, as Sunni Muslims, they're
very suspicious
of Shiite Muslims of Iran. On
top of that,
the Iranian nuclear program
concerns them.
And they think the deal which
the Obama administration
led last year is a lousy deal.
And so they're very concerned
about that.
For the moment, though, it's a
question of
oil price. Originally, when the
Saudis allowed
the price of oil to fall, their
target were
U.S. shale producers. And to an
extent, they
have made it uncomfortable for
U.S. shale
producers. But they have got a
new target
now, which is Iran, which wants
to expand
its oil production.
If that's going to happen, the
Saudis don't
want the Iranians to get much
revenue out
of it. So, they -- this is an
additional argument
why they want to keep the price
of oil comparatively
low.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sarah
Ladislaw, how do they
stay competitive here? Iran
wants to wake
up out of these sanctions. They
want to get
their market going and find a
lot of customers.
At the same time, Saudi Arabia
can pull more
crude oil out of the ground
faster than anyone
else. And -- but they need that
money for
their society to function.
SARAH LADISLAW: It's a great
question.
I mean, I think when you look at
the -- what
the Saudis contribute to the oil
market historically
and currently, it's about 10
million barrels
a day. And they have, as you
said, the lowest
listing costs in the world. And
they have
spare capacity, which means they
can bring
more on quickly.
I think that the real challenge
for them is
-- looking at this period long
term, is to
try and insulate their economy
from volatile
oil markets, right? I mean, part
of what people
see in their activity today is
some of this
sort of geopolitical rivalry.
But if you look at it from an
oil market perspective
back in 2014, there is really
nothing they
could have done to stabilize oil
markets at
that time. And, therefore,
they're using the
market to basically get rid of
the higher
cost oil in the system and then,
you know,
look for being able to keep a
market share
perspective going forward.
It's been fairly successful thus
far. We were
oversupplied by about two
million barrels
a day about a year-and-a-half
ago. And things
are starting to come into
balance. The question
going forward really for any
major oil-producing
economy is, how in charge of
their oil economy
will they be? What kind of --
what can they
do to ratchet up or down
production?
And for them, it's really a
question of how
dependent they are on that
revenue.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Sarah Ladislaw,
Simon Henderson, thanks so much.
SARAH LADISLAW: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The nation of
Bosnia-Herzegovina
remains bitterly divided more
than 20 years
after a vicious civil war. Tens
of thousands
died, and millions were made
refugees.
Bosnian Serbs were largely
responsible for
driving Muslim families from
their homes during
the early stages of the war. Now
many hope
the reopening of a United
Nations Heritage
Site, a mosque, in the Serbian
town of Banja
Luka is a big step on the road
to reconciliation.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant has
the story.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The Muslim call
to prayer
rang out from the 16th Century
Ferhadija Mosque
23 years to the day that Serb
militiamen blew
it to pieces; 10,000 Muslims
traveled to Banja
Luka to witness this act of
renaissance, a
generation after the Serbs had
attempted to
systematically erase not only
the population,
but also their culture and
heritage.
Ibrahim Ahmedbasic lost his legs
in one of
the worst single attacks of the
war. He was
21 when a Serb mortar exploded
in the town
of Tuzla, killing 71 and
injuring 250.
IBRAHIM AHMEDBASIC, Bosnian
Muslim (through
translator): When the mosques
began to be
reconstructed, people started to
coexist again.
So you can see, people are
capable of living
normally.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The Bosnian War
was the most
vicious of those that
accompanied the break
up of former Yugoslavia, largely
because of
the population's complicated
ethnic and religious
mix. The conflict began in a
wave of nationalism
in 1992, when the Christian
Orthodox Bosnian
Serbs attempted a land grab and
attacked areas
occupied by predominantly
Catholic Bosnian
Croats and Muslims.
In 1993, the country fragmented
still further,
when the Croats launched an
offensive against
the Muslims. Peace finally
arrived in 1995
with a deal signed in Dayton,
Ohio. The accord
preserved Bosnia as a single
state, but as
two separate entities, a
Muslim-Croat federation
and the Serb Republic; 21 years
later, the
divisions are as entrenched as
ever.
Banja Luka is the capital of the
Serb Republic,
which makes the restoration of
the mosque
so symbolic. It took 15 years to
reconstruct.
Craftsmen employed 16th century
techniques
and recovered 75 percent of the
original masonry
that had been discarded in city
dumps and
in nearby lakes.
OSMAN KOZLIC, Imam: This is one
of the most
beautiful mosques in Balkan, not
just in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Osman Kozlic is
the imam
of this World Heritage Site.
What is your message
specifically to the Serbs
in terms of reconciliation and
trying to move
on?
OSMAN KOZLIC: Our mosques, our
cathedrals,
our temples belong to all of
them, belong
to us. This is holy place, not
only for me,
as a Muslim, but it's holy place
for Catholics,
for Orthodox Serbs. And if we
are -- think
in that way, we have a good
future.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The mosque has
special meaning
for 21-year-old Emir
Galijasevic, even though
he was born just a year before
the war ended.
His family came from Banja Luka
and were among
those driven out during the
ethnic cleansing.
EMIR GALIJASEVIC, Bosnia: All
the criminals
who had done bad things in the
war had to
be going from the court. But I
still think
people can still live together.
We can still
be friends and work together and
be as a mirror
to other place in Europe, that
multiculturalism
can live, and it's, I think, the
best example
of this is this mosque in this
town.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But segregation
has been
exacerbated by economic
stagnation. On both
sides of the tangible partition,
unemployment
is sky-high, especially among
the young. When
part of Yugoslavia, this region
was reasonably
productive. Now it's anything
but.
Potential investors are
frightened away by
corruption and political
uncertainty.
Pero Slavnic, a former major in
the Bosnian
Serb army, is campaigning for
better benefits
and pensions for military
veterans. Financial
hardship contributed to his
divorce. Three
of his sons are unemployed. And
he is weary
of politicians manipulating
public opinion.
PERO SLAVNIC, Bosnia (through
translator):
I think we are now further away
from being
together without borders than
just after the
war. When foundations are
flawed, you become
skeptical about everything,
including the
hand that reaches for you from
the other side.
We are constantly asking, is
this an honest
hand? We have a lot of problems
in the area
of trust.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This would have
been the
perfect occasion for the Bosnian
Serb leader,
Milorad Dodik, to address the
issue of reconciliation.
Of all the dignitaries present,
his words
would have carried most
significant, because,
after all, for many Muslims,
Banja Luka represents
the lion's den.
He was due to make a keynote
speech, but he
clearly didn't like the tone of
this event
and elected not to speak. So, to
find out
what he thought, we headed past
the glittering
Serb Orthodox church to the
presidential palace
of the Serb Republic.
MILORAD DODIK, President, Serb
Republic (through
translator): I am sorry that
Ferhadija was
destroyed. But since then, we
were the ones
to support its reconstruction.
Evil times
happen. But people can't choose
those times.
We were born in that period.
But what we can do is to ensure
that we don't
behave in an inhumane way.
Regardless of our
religion, nationality and
ideology, we shouldn't
harm each other.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But former
Austrian diplomat
Valentin Inzko is skeptical.
He's responsible
for the civilian implementation
of the Dayton
peace accord and is concerned
that Dodik's
threat to secede from Bosnia is
poisoning
the atmosphere.
gave some money for this
renovated mosque.
On the other side, the refugee
return is many
times not so easy. People have
problems with
papers, et cetera. In schools,
they don't
-- they're not allowed them to
speak their
own language.
He invented a different name for
the Bosnian
language and so on. So we have
to measure
him on the ground, in the field.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This student
dormitory in
the wartime Bosnian Serb capital
Pale, a short
distance from Sarajevo, is the
most current
source of Inzko's concerns. It
was named in
honor of the wartime leader
Radovan Karadzic,
just as he was being sentenced
in late March
to 40 years imprisonment for
crimes against
humanity and genocide.
VALENTIN INZKO: Imagine in our
country, we
would have such dormitories
glorifying Nazi
people, et cetera. It's totally
unacceptable
and this is really something
where Mr. Dodik
has crossed a red line.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In Sarajevo,
besieged for
three years during the war,
Professor Muhamed
Hamidovic is a symbol of
reconciliation. His
wife was killed by a Serb mortar
fired from
the surrounding hills. He led
the reconstruction
of the Banja Luka mosque, but he
too is disillusioned.
MUHAMED HAMIDOVIC, Bosnia
(through translator):
We are still living in the past.
We need a
new global system. We need a new
approach
for young people. The current
situation is
horrible. I have a son who
doesn't know where
to go or what to do. For five
years, he's
unemployed. That's a tragedy.
We're talking
about reconciliation, and that's
so abstract
to me.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Back in Pale,
Radovan Karadzic's
old stomping ground, three young
students
are weary of the lack of hope,
and of being
tainted by the Serb wartime
legacy that has
nothing to do them.
ANOJELA BOROVCANIN, Bosnian Serb
Law Student:
It is really pointless to make
some differences
because people, because we are
all made of
bones and blood. And we are all
here for some
reason. We are here to live, and
we are here
to love, and we are here to
improve this world.
NENAD SAVIC, Bosnian Serb Law
Student: Bosnia-Herzegovina
is a place with too many fights
between people.
WOMAN: They were affected by
everything that
happened here a long time ago
and people think
-- still cannot let it go. And
that kind of
depressing. And there is like no
opportunity.
When you go somewhere else, you
see all those
opportunities, and what can you
actually do
and what you cannot do here in
my country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: If the
Ferhadija Mosque is
to be a component in breaking
down the barriers,
Western officials believe more
Muslims need
to pluck up the courage to
return to their
former homes in what is still
the Serb heartland.
But the Serbs also need to offer
genuine guarantees.
Ordinary people on either side
are forging
bonds. But it's widely accepted
that politicians
are getting in the way.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Banja Luka.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The past
couple of years
have brought new revelations
about sexual
abuse at private schools. At
least eight private
schools in New England have
launched or disclosed
investigations this year.
Now a Boston Globe investigation
has opened
a wider window on the scope of
the problem.
The report done by the Spotlight
unit that
exposed the sexual abuse scandal
in the church
found at least 67 New England
schools have
faced accusations since 1991.
The Globe also
found more than 200 former
students say they
have been assaulted or harassed,
and years
of alleged cover-ups in some
cases.
St. George's School in Rhode
Island is one
school under investigation.
Anne Scott is a survivor who was
allegedly
raped in 1977 at the school by a
former athletic
trainer when she was 15. Her
family later
brought a lawsuit, but the Globe
said the
school fought back with its own
suit and pressured
her to sign a gag order.
Here's part of what she told The
Globe.
ANNE SCOTT, Abuse Survivor: They
really turned
hostile and were trying to come
after that,
deposing all our neighbors,
deposing all my
roommates, all community
members.
So, I got shocked. I wasn't as
strong then,
I think, to put it in context,
as I am now.
And it became a lot of pressure.
I just said,
no amount of money is worth
tearing my family
apart.
When you are assaulted as a
child and a victim
of rape, you lose your voice.
You lose your
soul. You are sort of destroyed
as a person,
your confidence, your
self-image. And the
gag order just seals all that
in.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The trainer
died in 1996.
Lawyers for victims now say as
many as 50
alumni from the school were
abused, mostly
by staff.
Todd Wallack is a member of the
Spotlight
team, joins me now.
So, give us an idea of how
widespread this
is. This isn't just a couple of
private schools
in New England.
TODD WALLACK, The Boston Globe:
No, it's much
wider than a lot of us ever
imagined.
We originally started reporting
on this after
Anne Scott, the survivor you
featured, broke
her silence, broke the gag order
and spoke
out about the abuse that she
suffered at St.
George's in December. And that
prompted other
victims to come forward, many
after decades
and decades where they had kept
this secret.
And we started building a list.
And it kept
getting longer and longer. Some
were reported
before individually. Others
hadn't. We looked
through lawsuits. We talked to
lawyers. Since
our story on Sunday, we have
been getting
flooded with tips about
additional schools,
showing that we have not even
captured the
full scope of all the abuse
that's gone on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Given by the
nature of their
name, private schools, they are
private institutions,
do they have to report alleged
-- or abuse
by teachers to the state, like
public schools
do?
TODD WALLACK: Generally, in
public schools,
teachers are required to be
licensed, and
they're overseen by licensing
agencies that
can publicly discipline them and
let other
people be aware of potential
problems.
That isn't true with private
schools, which
generally don't have to license
their educators.
They're also not subject to
public records
law. They're not overseen by
public school
boards with open meetings laws.
So a lot of this information is
kept secret.
They are able to sign
confidentiality agreements.
And for that reason, it allows a
lot of the
abuse to remain secret. It
potentially allows
abusers to go to other schools.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There were
actually abusers
that were moving from school to
school, but
the parents in these new
schools, or the faculty,
nobody actually knew that.
TODD WALLACK: Yes, exactly.
There was a person that worked
at St. George's,
for instance, George (sic)
Thompson, who had
been accused by, I believe, a
dozen students
of inappropriate touching, went
to another
school, Taft, a few years ago
with great recommendations.
And Taft had no idea that he had
been previously
subject to those allegations.
St. George's hadn't told the
state, and said
at the time they didn't realize.
It was -- fell
under the definition of sexual
abuse and needed
to be reported. And we found 11
people who
had been accused went on to
other schools.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, what do
the schools
say? What is their rationale or
justification
for taking so long to go public
with this
information?
TODD WALLACK: Well, in some
cases, schools
will say a lot of these abuses
happened in
the '60s or '70s or '80s, and
they now know
more about how to handle it than
they once
did.
Some will say that sexual abuse
allegations
are very tricky. They want to
respect the
privacy of the victims. They
want to also
be cognizant that they can't
always prove
allegations. In a lot of cases,
you have an
alumnus who makes some
accusation, and the
staffer is the only other person
who was in
the room, and the staffer denies
it.
So they say they're trying to be
careful about
not ruining somebody's career.
Some of those
students who have been abused
say they are
too worried about their
reputation and wish
they had done more to at least
tell the community
about the allegations and find
out whether
there are other students Wanting
to come forward.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Todd Wallack
of The Boston Globe, thanks so
much.
TODD WALLACK: Thank you.
Appreciate it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You buy a new
smartphone or
computer, and you take your old
one to a local
recycler. It's the green thing
to do, right?
Well, it turns out a lot of
those devices
may not be getting recycled at
all.
From Seattle member station KCTS
and public
media's environmental
partnership EarthFix,
Ken Christensen and Katie
Campbell, who tells
the tory, follow the e-waste
trail.
JIM PUCKETT, Founder, Basel
Action Network:
So, everybody, this is scenario
one. We're
buying equipment. We look around
and see what
they have and we start haggling
over the price.
So any questions?
WOMAN: No, sir.
JIM PUCKETT: I think it's right
up here about
a quarter of a mile.
KATIE CAMPBELL, Jim Puckett is
leading a team
that's going undercover to find
out what actually
happens to electronics that are
sent to U.S.
recyclers.
JIM PUCKETT: Most of the public
still thinks
that the recyclers are
recycling, and that
they are going to recycle right
there in America.
It shows us 10 meters out.
KATIE CAMPBELL: Puckett is the
founder of
the Basel Action Network, a
Seattle-based
watchdog group that investigates
the afterlife
of electronics.
JIM PUCKETT: We are basically
trying to stop
the rich countries from dumping
their hazardous
waste onto poor countries.
KATIE CAMPBELL: In this case,
China.
WOMAN: They're running.
JIM PUCKETT: Running away?
(LAUGHTER)
KATIE CAMPBELL: To get inside, a
local driver
and translator posed as e-waste
buyers.
WOMAN (through translator):
Hello? We're here
to buy goods. We just want to
see the electronics.
KATIE CAMPBELL: With people
buying new computers
and other electronics more
frequently than
ever, electronic waste is now
the fastest-growing
waste stream in the world. On
top of that,
it contains toxic materials that
can poison
people and the environment.
This investigation began months
ago, when
Puckett's team put GPS tracking
devices inside
200 old computers, printers and
TVs. Then
they dropped them off at
locations across
the country at recycling
facilities, donation
centers and electronics
take-back programs,
including some of the industry's
most reputable
companies.
JIM PUCKETT: We sat back and
said, where are
they going to go? And the little
devices went
out and spoke to us, saying,
this is where
I am.
KATIE CAMPBELL: Puckett's group
partnered
with Carlo Ratti of the
Senseable City Lab
at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.
CARLO RATTI, Senseable City Lab:
Tracking
is really the first step in
order to design
a better system. One of the
surprising things
we discovered is how far waste
travels. You
see this kind of global e-waste
flows that
actually almost cover the whole
planet.
KATIE CAMPBELL: Each device
traveled an average
of about 2,500 miles, and around
a third of
the tracked computers were
exported. Of those,
most ended up here. Hong Kong is
home to one
of the world's busiest ports.
Ships deliver
more cargo than is possible to
inspect.
As a result, Hong Kong has a
reputation for
being a transit point for
illegal trade and
smuggling of all kinds. Most of
the exported
tracked devices led Puckett to a
little known
part of Hong Kong called the New
Territories.
JIM PUCKETT: It's really a
frontier. It's
really cowboy land out there.
KATIE CAMPBELL: Puckett followed
one tracked
printer here to a place that
calls itself
a farm.
WOMAN: Farmland.
JIM PUCKETT: Farmland? Yes,
that's a great
farm in there.
You would have no idea that
there was a huge
scrap yard there until you look
over the fence.
KATIE CAMPBELL: Inside, they
found printers
being taken apart by immigrant
workers.
JIM PUCKETT: I am looking for
asset tags to
tell me where the material came
from. I look
for the environmental harm
issues. I look
for the workstations to see how
these workers
might be exposed.
KATIE CAMPBELL: Many of the
workers handle
hazardous material without
protective gear.
One concern? Printer toner, a
probable carcinogen.
JIM PUCKETT: There is no
protections of this
labor force. There's no
occupational laws
that are going to protect them.
KATIE CAMPBELL: Jackson Lau is
the head of
the Hong Kong Recycling
Association. He runs
a licensed recycling facility in
the New Territories.
And he says the junkyards in the
area that
import e-waste are unlicensed
and unregulated.
JACKSON LAU, Hong Kong Recycling
Association
(through translator): These old
electronics
are usually being sorted and
dismantled, because
the leftover components are
worthless. They
are being dumped
indiscriminately.
JIM PUCKETT: Look at the tubes,
many, many
tubes thrown on the ground here.
KATIE CAMPBELL: The white
fluorescent tubes
light up LCD screens. Each of
them contains
mercury, and even a tiny amount
can be a neurotoxin.
JIM PUCKETT: Day in and day out,
these workers
are completely oblivious to this
hazard, are
smashing these. The tubes are
breaking right
in front of their faces, and
mercury is very
toxic.
WOMAN (through translator): Do
you wear a
mask?
MAN (through translator): No.
WOMAN: I ask him that if he
knows that the
white tubes are dangerous. He
has no idea.
KATIE CAMPBELL: The United
States is the only
developed nation that hasn't
ratified an international
treaty to stop First World
countries from
dumping e-waste on developing
nations. Other
developed nations set e-waste
collection mandates
and require electronics
manufacturers to pay
for domestic e-waste processing.
Further, the United States has
no federal
laws requiring electronics to be
recycled.
Half of states allow electronics
to be dumped
in landfills.
John Shegerian is the CEO of
Electronics Recycling
International, the largest
e-waste recycling
company in the United States.
JOHN SHEGERIAN, CEO, Electronics
Recycling
International: It takes hundreds
of employees
in each facility to do the real
work of electronic
recycling.
KATIE CAMPBELL: He says that
some recyclers
are exporting to cut costs,
because, in the
last two years, their biggest
source of revenue
has plummeted.
JOHN SHEGERIAN: At the height of
the market,
when we would go to sell steel,
plastic, aluminum,
gold, silver, palladium, copper,
we were getting
about 14 to 15 cents a pound
more than we
are today.
NARRATOR: Dell Reconnect, an
exciting program
that makes getting rid of old
technology easy.
KATIE CAMPBELL: Dell was the
first major computer
manufacturer to ban the export
of nonworking
electronics to developing
countries. They
partnered with Goodwill,
allowing people to
drop off old computers of any
brand for free
to be refurbished or recycled.
The electronics
are either dismantled on site or
sent to Dell's
recycling partners.
Dell says that more than 400
million pounds
of e-waste have been diverted
from U.S. landfills
because of their program. But
the Basel Action
Network and MIT's investigation
concluded
that the tracking devices placed
in old computers
and dropped off at participating
Goodwill
locations ended up in Hong Kong,
China, Taiwan,
and Thailand.
Beth Johnson manages Dell's
program.
BETH JOHNSON, Dell Reconnect: If
there's something
that did not follow the system,
we would certainly
want to know about it and we
would certainly
take corrective action.
KATIE CAMPBELL: In a written
statement, Goodwill
Industries said it is committed
to responsible
recycling, and encouraged its
member organizations,
which are autonomous, to review
their contracts
with Dell.
Back in Hong Kong, Puckett finds
more clues
to the scale of the problem.
JIM PUCKETT: A laptop with an
LCD screen,
ending up here in Hong Kong in
New Territories
from the Los Angeles school
system. Unbelievable.
KATIE CAMPBELL: Puckett finds
electronics
from U.S. police departments,
jails, hospitals,
and libraries.
JIM PUCKETT: The government is
always trying
to save taxpayers' money. So
they are obliged
in some cases to always do the
cheapest thing.
KATIE CAMPBELL: For now, market
forces are
driving e-waste exports.
JIM PUCKETT: Just throwing it on
the bank
here.
KATIE CAMPBELL: Without a
federal law banning
the export of e-waste, there's
little incentive
for the industry to change.
For KCTS and the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Katie
Campbell.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tune in
tonight on PBS for
a special two-night event
examining the nation's
rising gun violence. Watch new
documentary
films from "Independent Lens,"
"Peace Officer"
and "The Armor of Light,"
followed by special
town hall discussions hosted by
NPR's Michel
Martin.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.